---
layout: default
date: 2019-11-26 15:50:00 -0700
title: "On life"
categories: essays
tags: definitions life being philosophy
---

What is life? Life is suffering. To be is to have limitations, and our limitations cause us suffering. The cost of being is limitation, and the cost of limitation is suffering; the cost of being is therefore suffering (1). What are our limitations? Death and characteristics of our being: we are a certain size, a certain sex, a certain gender, a certain disposition for disease or disorder, et cetera. Death scares some of us; some are depressed by their inevitable deaths; some think it a shame to die. Some wish to have different size, a different sex, a different gender, a different disease, and that wish makes them suffer. But remember that to have limitations is to be; if we did not have them, we would not be. A thing that has no limitations is everything at once. There is no differentiation between anything in that state, so there is no being. Being is the result of differentiation through limitation.

If life is suffering, what is the purpose of life? It is “To / Swing on the spiral of our divinity and / Still be a human” (2); or, to find meaning in life and still retain our being through virtue; or to be virtuous so that we can justify our being. Why is justifying our being through virtue the purpose of life? Because through virtue can you withstand sustained challenge, sustained suffering in life. Some say the point of life is to be happy, but that cannot be, because happiness cannot sustain you in prolonged suffering. How can one be happy that they live if they are endlessly suffering? They cannot. If you ask a tortured prisoner if they are happy living, will they say yes? No, I don’t think they will. Why would someone enjoy their lives if they are in constant suffering? Life will always have suffering and you will be happy sometimes and miserable at other times; how is it possible to be happy if you are miserable? It’s not. The misery cancels out happiness. So then, there must be something more resilient than happiness, and that is virtue. But why? Because virtue strengthens your moral intuition, and it is through your intuition that you will find meaning in your suffering, which will justify your being.

Justify your being by finding meaningful callings, actions, places, people, et cetera. Find those things by listening to your moral intuition, which must be healthy and strong. Only with a healthy intuition do you know what is meaningful to you, and only with what is meaningful can you justify your being. Our thoughts matter. If we limit our thinking and ask ourselves what must be done to have a good day, our minds will return thoughts of actions that should be done. We did not think those thoughts, yet they came to us from our intuition deep within our subconscious. This phenomenon can be used to find what is meaningful to us. If we watch ourselves without presuppositions and note when we are not being self-conscious, it is likely those moments are of actions, places, et cetera, that justify our being. Those are moments in which slip from our conscious, we enter a state of “flow” or “zen” in which we are fully immersed in a moment of feeling, energy, and involvement. This is enjoyable because it is a moment where the connection between our moral intuition and our being is one. The stimulus of these moments is what justifies our being; they are meaningful to our lives. As such, our moral intuition will show them to our being.

Promote and protect your moral intuition by being virtuous; uphold the four cardinal virtues of justice, wisdom, courage, and temperance. Remember that “a virtuous path is the only path that justifies being to itself;” it is only through virtue can one bear the suffering of life and still sustain their being without corruption (3). You are virtuous when you uphold the cardinal virtues. It is justice that guides us to find the good in and of others; to know we are a collective community of the world; to know not to harm members of that community, for “what harms the hive harms the bee”; to have good faith in others; to seek the truth for the benefit of others. Justice is the most important virtue, for it is the source of all the others. It is wisdom that is the knowledge of good and evil, and the application of that knowledge. Wisdom is having the right action for the right time; to know what is right to do in the space between the action and its response. It is courage that is our ability to make an action in the face of fear, uncertainty, and intimidation; courage to stand up for what is meaningful in our lives against uncertain reactions and fates, and the intimidation from others and nature. And It is temperance that limits our desires; to know what is essential for our lives and to know what is enough.

Be virtuous by sheathing your mind; limit your thoughts and listen within, and there you will find your moral intuition. You know the difference between good and evil. By sheathing your mind, by limiting your thoughts, your intuition will guide you to virtue:

> “It is by sheathing intellect’s bright light that the sage remains at one with his self, ceasing to be aware of it, by placing it behind. Detached, he is unified with his external world, by being selfless he is fulfilled; thus is selfhood is preserved” (4).

An overactive mind wanders away from its intuition and virtue and abandons its being. It is an overthinking mind that is the source of suffering, “Overthinking / Overanalyzing / Separates the body from the mind. / Withering \[our\] intuition” (2) by corrupting our virtue such that we abandon that is meaningful to and justifiable of our being.

Sheath your mind by mastering your being; do so by following the teaches of Stoicism, Taoism, Buddhism, and others that teach the mastery of the mind and the body. They know what their body, as well as their mind, needs for health, and masters of being make strides to promote and sustain their health as a whole. They achieve “oneness.” By mastering being does one learn to sheath their mind. One who has mastered their being is one who has cultivated their connection between their intuition and being; they have learned to justify their being in the suffering of life without corrupting it. They have learned what is meaningful in their lives, and have developed ways of life that promote and sustain those things through the mastery of their mind and body. Remember that to achieve this, you must act without purpose. That is, know first what you desire, but do not try and obtain it outright, because you cannot. This is the lesson of purposelessness in Taoism. Rather, place yourself in a position in which you could achieve it. The woodcutter never caught the animal until he gave up trying, and returned to his woodcutting. That’s when his axe head flew off and killed the animal. “He had to get it without intention to do so” (5).

1\. Peterson, Jordan. “The Necessity of Virtue.” Hancock Lecture. 2010. Access electronically November 11, 2019. <[https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU](https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU "https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU")>.

2\. Members of Tool (band). “Lateralus” from the album _Lateralus_. Volcano Entertainment. 2001. Lyrics accessed electronically from Metrolyrics.com on November 12, 2019. <[https://www.metrolyrics.com/lateralus-lyrics-tool.html](https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU "https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU")>.

3\. Peterson, Jordan. “Why Be Virtuous?” Recorded University Lecture. 2017. Accessed electronically November 11, 2019. <[https://youtu.be/08emOe2g_W0](https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU "https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU")>.

4\. Laozi (Lao Tzu). _Tao Te Ching (Dao De Jing)._ 4th century BC.Chapter 7. Translated by Stan Rosenthal, 1984. Accessed electronically on November 11, 2019. <[http://www.egreenway.com/taoism/ttclz7.htm](https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU "https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU")>.

5\. Watts, Alan. (n.d.) “On Taoism.” Lecture. Retrieved November 19, 2019, from <[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl5J-229AOg&t=318s](https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU "https://youtu.be/gwUJHNPMUyU")>.
