---
layout: default
date: 2019-11-25 16:00:00 -0700
title: "To start, have no intention"
categories: essays
tags: art resistance pureposelessness philosophy
---

THE AMATEUR SAYS: “I want to write, but I must learn first. Writing is hard, and I need to learn all I can about the craft before I can ever write a page.” And so they spend weeks learning about writing. They learn techniques and rules. They learn about style. They watch lectures from academics and writers, and they hang on every word those professionals say. They seek wisdom from books about writing. “What will I write about? And how will I write it? And who will I write it for?” asks the amateur, and they begin to study more. Their mind races with thoughts, not of writing, but Nature, love, life, and so many other things. There are so many topics they could write on, they think. They learn about prose, and styles of prose, and decide which style would best suit their writing. They explore other forms, learning the art of novels, of short stories, of poetry. They learn the importance of the reader, and a truth that so few amateurs ever learn, that good writing is the changing of their reader’s ideas and not an expression from the author. It is true no one cares about what you have to say or think.

The amateur learns so much! So many good things too. And still, they think, “I am not ready to write. There is still much to learn,” and so they enroll in a university. They spend four years learning more about the English language, about technique, about the story, and so much more. Indeed, there are new things the amateur has learned from their degree. How to squeeze the essence from a book. How to think in different ways. But upon graduating, the amateur believes they are still unready to write. “There must be more to learn!” and so the amateur goes to graduate school. The amateur masters the English language: they know so much about rules and techniques and prose and story. They know how to create value in their writing. They know methods and tricks real writers use to create their incredible stories, and the amateur dreams of using them one day. But they never write. The amateur can take a complex piece of writing from the masters, and squeeze out nearly every drop of the essence of the Muse, of talent, of craft, of magic from its pages, yet years go by and the amateur never writes themselves. “Why?” they think, “Why can I not write? I never feel the urge. I learned so much yet I am still missing _something_. But what?” They spent years learning and preparing themselves for writing, and they never wrote a word in that time.

A few decades have passed now, and not a word written. The amateur has explored so much of writing, and art. They have picked up teaching now, and they lecture their students on the elements of style and prose, and on things they’ve learned. But they never wrote in all that time. Of all the knowledge they have learned, of all the wisdom they have made, they never found the secret to write. One morning, the amateur gives up. “I’m done. It’s not for me, I guess. I’ve learned so much and wrote nothing. So many years I have wasted not doing the thing I wanted to do! I am not a writer nor am I ever to be one,” the amateur says to themselves. That afternoon, they sit down and begin to write.

---

“There’s a secret that real writers know that wannabe writers don’t, and the secret is this: It’s not the writing part that’s hard. What’s hard is sitting down to write. What keeps us from sitting down is Resistance” (1). The amateur writer never sat down to write. That act was too powerful for them, they could not defeat their Resistance, so they stuck to learning everything they could about writing. And with all their vast knowledge, they never learned that secret: it’s harder to start than it is to do. A truth few amateurs know is that, by the time they graduate high school, they have learned enough about English and technique to start writing. They will be bad at first, but that’s the reality of skill. We all start at the bottom as novices, as apprentices, and we improve our skill through instruction _and doing_. An amateur can become an expert in writing and still not know how to write because learning about the craft is easier than doing the craft. The difference is wisdom and fear. The amateur is afraid to do the work, and they lack courage and wisdom to face their fears. They fear failure, criticism, alienation, poverty, and so much more. Worse, they fear success. They fear that they can make it. All of the amateur’s fears culiminate into Resistance. And so they allow Resistance to direct their lives away from their callings. That’s why an amateur never starts their work; never sits down and writes. They desire to do their work, and they try, but trying is weak. Too weak that Resistance has an easy time directing the amateur around their desire. So, by trying to do, the amateur avoids the work.

Here’s a question: when did Stephen King become a real writer? No, it was not when he published his first book or had a movie made. It was not when he made his first check from his writing. It was not when he became famous, a household name, or when he sold his first million books. No, King became a real writer on the day he started writing. He became a writer when he sent off his first manuscript. King became a writer when he received his first rejection letter, and nailed it to his wall before sitting down to write.

There is a lot that separates an amateur from a professional, but the defining factor is that the professional sits down and does the act, and they do it without intention. They somehow find a way to defeat Resistance, and know that the first blow is doing it without intention. The amateur finds excuses to avoid it; they never do the work. They give into Resistance. They find themselves like a dog chasing a rabbit in a field, and never laying their teeth on it; they chase a desire to write and do so much to write, but they never write a word. The professional has, they are the wolf who found how to snag that rabbit. Nobody reads from a wannabe writer because wannabes don’t do the work; there’s nothing to read from them. They make excuses not to do the work. Anyone who has ever read a book, an article, an essay, or a poem, or any other form of writing, has read from a professional, from a real writer. No, they may not be a good writer, and that assessment is not theirs to make, but they are a real writer because sometime before you read that book or essay or poem, they sat down and wrote it.

---

There is nothing a professional can tell an amateur for them to bring about action. Nothing. Yes, a professional can tell an amateur that it’s harder to start than to do or that it is Resistance that prevents them from starting, but the amateur will not understand that until they start working. They can’t, the wisdom is beyond them. To try and part wisdom and knowledge to an amateur is like trying to pass an egg through a wall. No matter the force or technique, the egg won’t go through. It’ll end up a mess of yoke, white, and shell on the ground. Why is that? Because the wall is too dense and the egg not dense enough. The same is true for the amateur: they are too dense for knowledge and wisdom to pass through.

What changes then? The amateur gives up trying to write and then writes. They stop trying with intention and purpose and let it happen as it does. Somehow, by giving up, they find the secret to beating Resistance just once. When they do this, a crack forms in their dense heads. That crack is enough for wisdom and knowledge to enter into their minds, and change them. It makes them better. It makes them more resistant to Resistance, enough that they continue to fight it. Of Aesop’s Fables comes this story of “Hercules and the Wagoner”:

> A CARTER was driving a wagon along a country lane, when the wheels sank down deep into a rut. The rustic driver, stupefied and aghast, stood looking at the wagon, and did nothing but utter loud cries to Hercules to come and help him. Hercules, it is said, appeared and thus addressed him: “Put your shoulders to the wheels, my man. Goad on your bullocks, and never more pray to me for help, until you have done your best to help yourself, or depend upon it you will henceforth pray in vain.” Self-help is the best help. (2)

It is often contributed to the phrase “God helps those who help themselves,” and you don’t have to believe in a god to see the wisdom of this. An amateur learning about their craft is the wagoner crying to the gods and professionals for help. The amateur wants something, to write for instance, but they don’t help themselves first, which would be sitting down and doing the work. Do you see? The amateur wants to write but does not write. Why? Resistance. The amateur won’t face Resistance themselves. An individual’s metamorphosis from amateur to professional happens only when they act to start it, only when they act in defiance of Resistance, and no amount of goading or philosophy or instruction or knowledge will help it happen before. The amateur must do it themselves first.

There is a lesson from Taoism on this, which is called purposelessness. The idea is simple: one must get without intention that which he desires. Here’s an example Alan Watts gives on this principle, a Zen story: There is a woodcutter out in the forest, and he is chopping trees down with his axe. Along comes a Satori animal that the woodcutter wants to get and eat. The animal knows this and mocks the woodcutter, who tries and fails to catch the creature. The animal knows the action of woodcutter; it can see what he intends to do and avoids him. Eventually, the woodcutter gives up and returns to chopping a tree. The animal continues to mock him as he swings into the tree, and at that moment, the axe head flies off the handle and kills the animal. “You see,” Watts said, “he had to get it without intention to do so. That’s what is called purposelessness in Taoism” (3).

Do you see how this principle applies to the amateur writer? The amateur never writes because they act intending to write, so the amateur learns all about writing and makes no action toward writing itself. But the amateur never writes. Trying to write avoids the act of writing. You could say that the writing itself knows the amateur’s actions, and avoids them. It wants nothing to do with the amateur. Their Muse is shaking their head above them, thinking “will this amateur ever learn?” Why? When they give up trying, the amateur finds what is necessary within themselves to start. They find a little way to beat Resistance once, which is enough to beat it again and again So the lesson is that one does when one does not intend to do it. Trying to do the act avoids the act itself. Once the amateur learns this lesson, and they sit down and start, then amateur is gone, and in their place sits a profession doing their work.

1\. Pressfield, Steven. 2012. _The War of Art._ From chapter “What I Know.” New York, New York: Black Irish Entertainment.

2\. Aesop. 620-564 BCE. Aesop’s Fables. “Hercules and the Wagoner.” Translated by George Fyler Townsend. Urbana, Illinois: Project Gutenburg. Retrieved November 19, 2019, from <[https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21 "https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21")>.

3\. Watts, Alan. (n.d.) “On Taoism.” Lecture. Retrieved November 19, 2019, from <[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl5J-229AOg&t=318s](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21 "https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21")>.
