---
layout: default
date: 2019-11-01 16:00:00 -0700
title: "The New Day"
categories: essays
tags: muse resistance self-actualization
---

Every day is a new day and I am reborn. The troubles of yesterday are dead, and my slate is clean. I may not know what will happen, but I do know that the same challenges I battled yesterday will present themselves again today. That is okay for I am ready to beat them again.

Each day is a gift from the gods, the higher sphere, the Spiral, the Universe, the Infinite, our Divinity. I know that my existence to them is meaningless, and that is just, but to me, I am grateful they have given to me another chance at greatness. With all my strength, I will accept what challenges come and overcome them; I will accept my blows and learn from my wounds; I will open up and embrace whatever comes my way. I will allow the Muse to whisper into my ears her great songs as I do my work. I may not know what will be on the pages but that’s okay; the Muse will deliver if she sees that I am there, ready to do my part. She will always put something on my page; I do not wait for inspiration, I act in the anticipation of it.

Each day for me is like that of a hatching chick: I peck at my shell until a crack forms and the light of the world shines through. In the craze, I work to open myself to the world, ready to take life as it comes and to do my purpose as obligated from the Spiral. I know that just above, beyond my perception, in the higher realm, is an angel of sorts, a star of divine wisdom that cheers on. "Come on, little one," she says to me, "you can do it. Push, now, come on. You have work to do. Now, push. Push." And then, here I am another day. I know every second I live, my ethereal champion is there to guide me on, for she knows that a mortal needs help to do the work of their gods. When William Blake said that "eternity is in love with the creations of time," he meant that the gods depend on mortals to accomplish the work of their gods; to do timeless work in the time-bound world.

---

I start my new day with my old routines: turn off the alarm, make fresh coffee, toast a slice of bread, made a coffee, spread crunchy peanut butter upon the toast with a drizzle of honey, and enjoy my sustenance in the darkness. When my breakfast is concluded, I will sit and listen to music. This is for two reasons: to enjoy the art of professionals I admire and to allow time for new ideas to form. I will say my daily prayer, a few lines from a song, and after this, I read the art of professionals I respect to improve my craft and to expand my knowledge. When it is time, I will leave for a walk and run on a nature trail so that I can appreciate the ultimate work of art. When I return, it is time for a small snack and to read some more. By nine or ten o’clock, when exactly I confess that I have not decided, I sit down to do my work. I say aloud Steven Pressfield’s (1) prayer, as a token of my gratitude to the wisdom he shared, and to invoke the Muse for my work. The prayer is called the invocation of the Muse, written by Homer in his Odyessy and translated by T. E. Lawrence:

> “O Divine Poesy, goddess, daughter of Zeus, sustain for me this song of the various-minded man who, after he had plundered the innermost citadel of hallowed Troy, was made to stray grievously about the coasts of men, the sport of their customs, good and bad, while his heart, through all the sea-faring, ached with an agony to redeem himself and bring his company safe home. Vain hope — for them. The fools! Their own witlessness cast them aside. To destroy for meat the oxen of the most exalted Sun, wherefore the Sun-god blotted out the day of their return. Make this tale live for us in all its many bearings, O Muse.”

And then I begin my work. She may have given me an idea on which I will work and expand on, or I will continue with existing work, mastering it as she requests. All of this to accomplish my vocation and my obligation to the gods, the Muse, the Infinite, and the Spiral. When my work is done, I begin the rest of the activities for the day.

I have beaten the hardest challenge with the help of the Divines today. I have beaten Resistance, and I know that tomorrow, it will be reborn stronger and harder and meaner. It will try to scream fear into my heart and poison my mind. It wants to destroy me; to cause me harm; to prevent me from accomplishing my work of the Muse. Resistance knows nothing but power and destruction, and as a great evil, it’s darkness renews as I do each day. That is okay; I will tighten the strings of my helmet, sharpen my blade, fortify my armor to meet that demon on its grounds, and drive my sword through its evil face. I will slay Resistance again every day, every time it returns, and bury it in the cold, dead earth; its grave will be unmarked and forgotten.

---

That is my day, and though it may change as I grow old, I am no less thankful to have it. I was once not like this but lived much like a fool, an amateur. I gave into Resistance every day and relished in my anguish and fears. I made hopes for tomorrow but never for today; and if I did start, I knew I would never finish the task. I made beautiful dreams and set them as my stars, and chased after them like a blind fool, for I had been given a calling early in life, and I had passion for it, and soon there was the ambition for it. Yet, I did not act on that ambition. I did not write. Fear ruled me, turned me asunder, and set me on a course for the ground. I found Pressfield’s _The War of Art_ when I got there, and thanks to him (and the Muse) I realized my errors and changed my mind. That’s all it took, a change in mind that produced action.

Now, I am much more critical of what I do and of who I am. I know that Resistance is never far and its tongue ever-so-sweet, and if I am to kill it for the day, I must be ruthless, a professional. I seek simplicity in life, as Thoreau did. Simplicity in obligations, in processions, in friends, in activities, et cetera. I do not need much to do my work, and what I desire, I assess as distractions from Resistance. They and excess must be destroyed, be parted with, be dissected from life.

My life is governed by such rules now. I am a man much more content with life because of them. It is something special, like the birth of a child, the hatching of a chick, that such a decision brings. I use to be so hard and concluded about my craft, that I would find a career for prosperity from the hierarchies and write on the side (rather than write and work on the side), that I thought I _am_ a writer rather than I _write_. These conclusions are amateurish, they identify too much with the craft and see it as life itself. That is wrong; a craft is not why you live. You live to work the craft; to do the work of the gods, the Muses, the Infinite, and the Spiral. That is your purpose, why you have life, which is so rare. Your work is not yours, but theirs, and you act only as the transcriber so that the world can have it. I am not a writer, but I write for the writer, who is my Muse. You can call me a writer but I know who I am. Such distinctions were epochal for me, and they cured a lot of my issues.

1\. [Steven Pressfield](https://stevenpressfield.com/ "Steven Pressfield") is the author of _The War of Art_ and _Turning Pro_. Both books helped me change who I was and start writing; they are indispensable.
