---
layout: default
date: 2020-02-05 15:50:00 -0700
title: "On my self-control"
categories: essays
tags: life self-development control discipline
---

I have a confession. I love chocolate chip cookies: I love making them, as it’s therapy in some way, and I love eating them because they’re delicious. But this love comes at the price of my self-control because with each cookie I eat, the less control I have to beat my food addictions.

Cookies are poison, and so is everything else like them. Cakes, ice cream, brownies, pies, potato chips, soda, and all other junk food are loaded with sugar and fat, which makes them delicious and poisonous to our bodies. With each bite of these things, I poison my body with sugar and other things it wasn’t meant to ingest, and I poison my self-control such that it’s harder to resist these temptations. I know it’s poison, yet I eat it anyway. I enjoy it.

That’s pathetic and shameful, I think. Am I so weak in self-control that I cannot resist the temptation to eat these sweets? Yes. I’m addicted to junk food, to the sugar and fat, and I know that without change, it will kill me. So, what am I doing about it?

I’m fasting 16 to 20 hours per day. Why? First, I know that if I don’t limit my intake of food, I won’t have the self-control to resist junk food. Second, I believe that the body doesn’t need so much food as the standard diet recommends: three meals per day with snacks is a lot of food, which makes it more likely that most of it are junk food. Our ancestors ate less since food was less abundant. So, it was natural to gorge since it was uncertain when the next meal was to be. For most of us, though, each meal is in the refrigerator — our modern food is abundant. But it’s also poisonous. So, I think I can eat less, and in doing so, I will be better and healthier.

In addition to fasting, I’m exercising more with running and long walks. I enjoy these activities because they’re meditative and they get me outside in nature. They’re also cheap and easy to turn into a habit which will lead to other good habits. And running can become quite intense with marathons and ultra-races, which could test my physical limits and my self-discipline if I decide to go that far with it. What if?

Despite these two changes, I’m still struggling. Last night, I made and enjoyed a batch of cookies. I told myself it the last batch and the last day that I’ll eat those sweets, but I know today that I will be tempted and that I may give in. And there’s the issue: going into today, I’ve already decided that I will be defeated, so defeat is assured. What I must do, then, in addition to my fast and exercise, is quit all those sweets cold turkey. Decide, once and for all, that I will not give in. I’m better than those cookies.

One trick the Stoics and Buddhists use to deal with nagging lusts is to deconstruct them into their elementary parts, and then evaluate them for what they are. So, if I consider the chocolate chip cookies I made last night, and deconstruct them, then their components include flour, white sugar, brown sugar, chocolate chips (more sugar), butter, eggs, vanilla, baking soda, and salt. The cookies are mostly sugar. Then, each cookie I eat is like eating a few tablespoons of sugar. Would I do that? No, that’s disgusting. Then why would I eat the cookies? It’s the same thing in a different form.

What about the precedent set by each cookie I eat? With each one, I become more likely to eat more, and more likely to become obese, which will lead to death. I remember watching an autopsy of an obese cadaver a long time ago (I was into pathology then), and it was disturbing. I don’t want to be like that cadaver. Is it true that if I don’t stop my sugar addiction, then I could become obese like that individual? Yes. Is it true that obesity is linked to heart and liver diseases, which could cause death? Yes. Then, is it true that if I don’t stop my addiction today, I could die in the future from diseases related to obesity? Yes. Then, why do I continue to eat those things knowing that it could cause me to die? “Because they’re addictive — and delicious.” So, I’m willing to die in the future because they’re delicious? Of course not, but that’s the truth of this situation.

It’s likely, as well, that I won’t die from obesity-related diseases from eating cookies and junk food. But it is true that if I am addicted to junk food, I have no self-control or self-discipline, and if I have no self-control and self-discipline, then I will not reach my goals. So, if I’m addicted, then I will not reach my goals. Why is that? Because addiction takes my focus away from my goals: if I’m unfocused, then I cannot do the work that is required of my goals. I know from experience that an unfocused mind leads to ruin: how often was I more concerned about grabbing snacks from my school’s convenience store than I was about studying? Quite, and what was the result? Failure.

I do not want to die because of heart failure, and I do not want to fail because of a lack of self-discipline. So, then, I will quit those habits today — for good. Cold turkey, is the only way. No more junk food: I will not buy it for myself nor will I make it. If it enters the house, I will not eat it. If I am tempted, I will resolutely refuse. I will honor my future self, and my past self who was not as strong, with these decisions, and when it gets hard, I will remember what I’ve reasoned here. I will not give in. I will continue to strengthen my resolve so that my future self can accomplish that which he cares for the most.
