---
layout: default
date: 2020-01-01 16:00:00 -0700
title: "With Fear and Awareness"
categories: essays
tags: failure fear awareness resistance
---

Resistance is what Steven Pressfield calls the driving force against what might do good for you or others. This force prevents you from doing what is most important to you – it keeps you from your work. Resistance is the amalgamation of your fears, and it is bad.

But this negative force creates a positive force, one that I think draws someone to their good work. Fear, in the shape of Resistance, can be the pull to one’s most important work. Then, it is when that fear is the strongest when one must consider that what they fear may be what they most need. The source of their fear might actually be their calling.

One might think that is the end of useful fear, but I think fear can also be the force behind endeavor if used well. What if one feared failure so much that it overpowers their Resistance? They would be unstoppable — they would overcome every obstacle before them and accomplish every goal they set. They would not give up or give in.

But, what is the fear of failure? It is the fear that you have made no progress in your life toward valuable goals and dreams. It is the fear that you will mislive your life, regretting your weaker, older self for not being more aggressive and ambitious and disciplined.

No one wants to be the “writer” who just died and never wrote a page let alone published a book. No one wants to reflect on their life and discover the truth that they have mislived all of it: all of those opportunities and goals and dreams and callings squandered. All the time they had, and they made no progress — they have nothing to show.

No one wants to mislive their life but everyone can. It is possible because we’re easily distracted and defeated by Resistance. Our priorities are mixed-up or we are seduced by failure being okay — a necessary step in the process. I suppose the right failure is — the failure that comes despite your immense effort in thwarting it. That failure has a lesson to be learned, and I think the greatest lesson from it is to never give up even when defeat is obvious. The other failure — weak failure — is the result of giving up, and that is not acceptable.

Yet, we have given up: we’d rather watch videos and streams than read a book; we scroll through feeds rather than practice a skill; if we could go for a run — or even an exhaustive walk — it’d be to the couch rather than around the block; we eat chips, cookies, cakes, and candy over a salads, fruits, and nuts — drink soda and juice and sugared drinks over water; we’d rather not be bothered with a difficult exercise or problem or project; if there’s an opportunity today, we want it tomorrow instead; and then we have the foolish audacity to laugh about our failure — to joke with others that _this_ is how it is — that it’s not _us_ but _them_ that ruined us. No, it’s you.

You’re the reason why you fail. You’re the reason why you eat cookies over fruits, drink soda over water, watch over read, lounge over exercise, et cetera. You’re the reason why you don’t make progress on your goals. You don’t take responsibility for your failures. You don’t learn your lessons. You lack accountability for your life and are quick to point blame, to cite one from a hundred excuses for why you fail, why you give up or give in. None of them is right — you are the reason why you fail. Yes, the world sucks. Life’s hard, there’s a lot of bad shit going on, but it’s not the reason why you make bad decisions and fail in life. You are. You decide to allow external forces to affect you in such a way as to make you passive, make you weak. You give in. You’ve allowed yourself to become a passenger of your life. You’re the captain blaming the storm for wrecking your ship rather than yourself for sailing into it unprepared. You’re the reason why you fail, and you’ll be the reason why you fail in the future.

To not not, to not mislive your life, you must fight — you must become afraid of failure. Become afraid of yourself. Be terrified of losing, of no progress made, of giving in to your desires, of getting the cheap fix. Be scared from a misday, a misweek, a mismonth, or a misyear. Do you want to be this person you are today, for the rest of your life? It can easily be done if you have not learned to fear yourself and your ability to fail. You want your fear of failure to be the driving force in your work so that you choose to persevere and not give up or give in. Your fear of failure will build your self-discipline. It will make you stronger. You will become a better person, one who accomplishes everything they set out to do. You will live your life.

Nothing else but the fear of failure and self-discipline can do that for you. Passion is unreliable. Motivation is fleeting. None of these, or anything similar, even their culmination, is enough to drive your work. They come and go on their time, but the fear of failure is on yours. You can decide — now — to become afraid of failing yourself in your life. Today, you are the reason why you fail, but you can also become the reason why you succeed.

---

Here’s a truth: I was not afraid when I wrote that preceding section. That day, I ate the poison — the chips, soda, candy, burger, and cake. I did not hesitate. I’m not proud, but being aware of what I wrote made me realize how destructive I am to myself. While I ate the poison, I gained awareness. That day, I also started running.

I think self-discipline begins with awareness. The fear of failure is the path to self-discipline, but to be afraid of failure, you must be aware of yourself — know exactly what you are doing at every moment. Think in the moment of action, “I am doing this thing. I am doing this thing.” I am writing this sentence. I am writing this sentence.

This is an exercise Buddhist gurus give to their students, and it is hard to do. The brain receives and ignores a lot of stimuli such as the feeling of sitting and wearing your watch or glasses. Such stimuli are not important to survival, so the brain filters it out. It also filters out motions, such as brushing your sleeve off and drinking coffee (both of which I did a moment ago and didn’t consciously think of it). To be aware as the exercise suggests, you must acknowledge — consciously think of — every action you do, including the actions the brain normally filters out.

This requires immense focus. I notice that when I am writing, I am dictating in my head the words that appear on the page — what I think appears on the page. Well, to acknowledge that I am typing, I have to break out of my internal dictation. I have to shift my focus from the participant in action to the observer of the action. This stops the action. So, I think the lesson to be learned is how to observe your actions without interrupting them.

What awareness leads to is the acknowledgment of all of your failures, which culminate in your personal failure. I said that I was aware of my eating of junk food, and this made me realize that I have no self-control. Then, I personalized my failure: My eating of food as a result of my lack of self-control and lack of exercise leads to my fatness. I don’t want to be fat, so I need to stop eating food and start exercising. Hence, I started running yesterday and started fasting today. These actions will become a habit if I maintain my awareness of my personal failure — that if I don’t run and don’t fast, then I will remain fat because I lack self-control — which will build my self-discipline.

This applies to every facet for self-discipline, not just nutrition and exercise. For my writing, I’m aware that it’s harder to sit down to start than to just start. So, I’ve automated this step: at 6 AM, I sit down and open a document. I start playing some music. I begin writing and will continue to write until 8 AM. By then, I should have hit my goal of 1,000 words. This routine was established as a result of my awareness of my failure to write.

So, when learning discipline, start with awareness: “I am doing this thing. I am doing this thing.” By being aware, you will acknowledge the mistakes you make, which will culminate in failures if you do not remedy them. So, you must apply your awareness to your work. If you're an aspiring painter: stop aspiring and start painting. Be conscious — be aware — of your painting: “I am using the brush to paint the blue sky.” You may notice that the blue that you used, or your technique, was off: “That blue is more sea-color than sky-color” or “That streak there is distracting.” Then fear your mistake, as if you do not remedy those mistakes, the painting will be a bust, and you will be an amateur painter who is not learning to be better. Hence, you will not become a painter of recognition. No one will buy your paintings. You will stop painting. You will be a failure. Recognize how easy it is to fail yourself — a minor mistake can lead to destruction. Then, realize some remedies for those mistakes: “I will use some white and light blue to blend that darker blue streak into the setting.” The point is to use your awareness of yourself to enable your fear of failure which will result in solutions that will become actions of self-discipline.

---

I learned from awareness that I am my biggest obstacle. For a long time, I have felt tension: it lived in my mind, in my gut, in my shoulders. It felt like two opposite pulling themselves apart: the failing self and the potential self. I knew that I had the potential to do great things, but I allowed my failing self to tug harder by giving into my failures. Each failure enabled the failing self to tug harder. The weaker potential self was a just-noticeable tension.

After a while, I became sick of the tension. I hate being a failure, yet in every way I allow myself to be one. I allow myself to be influenced by external forces such that I chased what felt good rather than what was good for me. As a result, I became worse. I am critical of myself _now_ because I know that if I am not, I will fail myself in the future. I am critical so that I accomplish my goals and uphold my obligations to myself. I know that I can be better if I applied myself, and this is what I am doing.

This is why I am passionate about this: those who fail, do so because they allow themselves to — that’s the bottom line. They give up on their potential for the easy fix. They give in at 40 percent of their ability, that is their limit. It was mine too. But man, I have more to do. So much potential to apply to the things that are important in life. I know I can enjoy myself if I stop giving into comfort.

We’re all living out of the woods today — in the comfortable clear — but I think we all need to venture in as Thoreau did. He said, “I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in my next excursion. For most men, it appears to me, are in a strange uncertainty about it … ” (1). Yes, today we are still “in a strange uncertainty” about life, and our current progressions are leading us into ruin, into mislived lives with tombstones without epitaphs and eulogies without praise. What a damn shame.

We all need to live Spartan-like — to walk into those mean woods and find yourself some courage, and to make yourself into someone of purpose and value. That’s the Path to the good life.

1\. Thoreau, Henry David. (1854). _Walden, and On The Duty of Civil Disobedience._ “Where I Lived, and What I Lived For.” Project Gutenberg. Released 1995. Retrieved from <[https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/205](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/205 "https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/205")>.
