---
layout: default
date: 2020-02-16 14:45:00 -0700
title: "Michel de Montaigne on Death"
categories: essays
tags: death philosophy strategies
---

In his essay, “[That to Study Philosophy is to Learn to Die](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3600/3600-h/3600-h.htm#link2HCH0019 "Montaigne on Gutenberg Project"),” Michel de Montaigne says that to fear death is ridiculous. “What a ridiculous thing it is to trouble ourselves about taking the only step that is to deliver us from all trouble!” he says. He reasons that our birth was the beginning of our life, in which we accomplish many things, and in our death is the cessation of those things. The conclusion. Death is our closure to life, and rather to be fear, it should be welcomed.

But we don’t welcome death, and this was something Montaigne realized during his time, and it is still true today. Most of us are afraid to die. Our deaths, though inevitable, cause us immense torment. Why? A first answer might be because death is strange and disconcerting – what is it to be not alive? We can never know or imagine what it would be to experience what it is to be dead. And it does not help that we rarely meditate on our deaths, because it is a painful thing to do, but this inaction causes us more trouble. Because we do not meditate on our deaths, it seemingly sneaks upon us by surprise. We don’t realize it's over until its over, and even then, how would we know we have died?

Another answer as to why death is scary is that it looms everywhere: we often do not realize that at any moment we could die for almost any reason or cause. A misstep into the busy road, a falling brick, a late action in surgery, an infected paper-cut, years of bad habits culminating into a nasty disease of the heart, brain, or liver, etc. This discovery is like looking up and seeing a sword hanging over your head by a little thread: one right gust, one little snip, and you’d be dead. You could have been dead already and not know it, and not have even started your great work or great self-discovery. This thought is an immediate reminder of the fragility and quickness of life.

The point is that so many things can bring us death, and at any time, and this uncertainty scares us. We could die in the next hour; we could die reading this essay. We want to know how we will die and when so that we could find peace. We want to know so that we can plan our last moments, because only when we know that our end is soon, then we take appropriate actions in our lives. But “what matters it,” says Montaigne, “which way it comes to pass, provided a man does not terrify himself with the expectation?” What does it matter how we die or when we die as long as we don’t scare ourselves with knowing that it will happen? But that’s exactly what we do. Even in knowing how and when we will die we often find fear in this knowledge. It is traumatizing to know one's end is near and be unprepared for it, to be unaccepting of it. This was [the fate of the great John von Neumann](https://books.google.com/books?id=YZd9DAAAQBAJ&pg=PA65#v=onepage&q&f=false "The Portfolio Theorists: von Neumann, Savage, Arrow and Markowitz") when he "realized he was incurably ill his logic forced him to realize that he would cease to exist... \[a\] fate which appeared to him unavoidable but unacceptable."

What is another reason why death is fearful? I think it’s that we are always living in the future, pushing off our greatest work for tomorrow or next week or next year, and so on. If it's not our work, we push off knowing ourselves for simple trivialities such as TV and Facebook. Regardless of what it is, it gets pushed off into the future, which is unguaranteed. Soon one realizes how close to death they are and realizes how much they still want to do with their lives. They learn that they have a few moments left of life, which is often not enough to complete what they wanted to do or learn who they truly, deeply are.

So, how could we get a grip on it? How can we end our fear of death if it surrounds us? Montaigne says that we “must make more early provisions for it,” to premeditate and reflect on our deaths. We should learn how to die, not in studying philosophy, though that may help some, but in studying our lives and Nature. In doing this, Montaigne says that we will learn to fight Death; to make his expectation so common as to “deprive \[of\] him of the greatest advantage he has over us,” which is fear; and “to disarm him of his novelty and strangeness, let us converse and be familiar with him.” Further, Montaigne says to acknowledge all the easy ways we could die every day, and ask ourselves “What if it had been death itself?” to “encourage and fortify ourselves.” This is also a lesson from the Stoics who says to live today as if it was our last, as it very well might be. Lastly, Montaigne says that we should know of our fragility, have it in our minds, so that we can learn to enjoy our lives more; so that we appreciate what life has for us rather than to take it for granted.

In doing these things, we learn how to die, and in doing that, we learn how to be free while we live. “The premeditation of death is the premeditation of life,” Montaigne said. “He who has learned to die has unlearned to serve. There is nothing evil in life for him who rightly comprehends that the privation of life is no evil: to know, how to die delivers us from all subjection and constraint.” Death is again the conclusion of all of one’s troubles and worries. It is freedom from life's suffering, and it should be a welcomed relief.

Montaigne realizes that to do this is at first uncomfortable: “we must feel a sting in such images as these, at first; but with often turning and returning them in one’s mind, they, at last, become so familiar as to be no trouble at all.” Then, what is the point for us to fear our deaths or to worry about the uncertain end of our lives? If we know that it will happen, and we prepare ourselves rightly and make adjusts to our lives for this, then the inevitability of our death should of no concern. In other words, if we make the right provisions today, we should be happy and ready to go at any time. We can live our lives better as a result.

How do we make those right provisions? The first, as mentioned, is to premeditate and reflect on our lives and our death. The second, says Montaigne, is to have few things going: prioritize the most important projects in your life, and cut all of the excesses away. Montaigne quotes Horace, “Why for so short a life tease ourselves with so many projects?” How true, and we continue to busy ourselves with excessive projects and trivial entertainment. Projects that offer no value to us; that, if anything, make us miserable. TV, Facebook, the lives of eminent celebrities, email, baubles, and squabbles between family and friends – are these things equal to our time, to our life?

Montaigne warns us further that “a man must design nothing that will require so much time to finishing, or, at least, with no such passionate desire to it brought to perfection. We are born to action: ‘When I shall die, let it be doing that I had designed’ (Ovid).” In other words, choose something to do and go with it to the end; make that thing work, die in working. If you will fail, what's worth doing to the end? Many great artists have died before they could finish their work. In this, I think, and perhaps Montaigne would agree, that this is the noblest way to die.

How to find such work is a question for a different day, but Montaigne answers how to find wisdom for Death. Nature, he says, “compels us to it. ‘Go out of this world,’ she says, ‘as you entered into it; the same pass you made from death to life, without passion or fear, the same, after the same manner, repeat from life to death. Your death is apart of the order of the universe, ‘tis a part of the life of the world: ‘Mortals, amongst themselves, live by turns, and, like the runners in the games, give up the lamp, when they have won the race, to the next comer (Lucretius).’” In other words, we should die without fear or passion, without unfinished business. More, in finding what wisdom you need to die, look to Nature for she has it all. One does need to study philosophy to find prepare themselves to die, just Nature and themselves.

Have you ever noticed that, often, the older people become, the less concerned with death they are? I’ve met before a quote of an older woman on death, that the fear of death is a “young person’s game.” It is as if the older one becomes, the less afraid to die they are – why is that? I think it because they’ve had more time to reflect on their death and realize what value it has for them. Older people realized, I think, what Montaigne says, that “wherever your life ends, it is all there. The utility of living consists not in the length of days, but in the use of time; a man may have lived long, and yet lived but little.” So, why be worried about the end when you should be making the best use of your time today? The Taoists say to let go of the end, for it is not of our control.

This is something I realized today: I can die today, even within the hour. If I do, I asked myself, would I be ready to go? I answered no because I have not done the work I want to leave in this world. I have not honored my promises and sacrifices. I have not done the work of the Muses. In other words: my life’s work is incomplete. Hell, it’s not even started nor thought about. Why? Because I pushed it off, believing it would be better handled when I am more trained; when I have mastery over my writing; when I have finished my philosophical training; when I have sufficient knowledge, and so on. I placed many "when I have's" before my work, and developed the opinion that what I do now is sufficient, as an excuse to wait to start my great work. Yet, I could die today, even within the hour, and that’ll be it. My chance to do my work of the gods, and it’d over. I would have squandered my life. I would have mislived it, though how short it would be.

That's not what I want, and it should be reason enough for me to start today what I want to do with this. A new mantra I learned the other day is, "Fire, Ready, Aim," or to start your work now before you're ready. Often what we do requires little to no preparation, and we'd be better off just starting it. That's what I should do, and I think most of us should do before our time is up.

We all have this risk of squandering our lives: of not living and doing what we’re born to do, but misliving them in doing what we want to do. Often what we want isn’t aligned with what Fate wants from us: we’d rather watch YouTube or scroll Facebook when Fate wants us to write our novel or paint a scene or start a business. But we can curb this: if we reflect on our lives, realize how short it can be, acknowledge our deaths, then maybe we will realize that we should be working and living better today.
