---
layout: default
date: 2020-02-17 16:00:00 -0700
title: "On The Why"
categories: essays
tags: work process philosophy
---

A lot of self-improvement books available today will tell you to focus on your process over your progress. They said to do this for many reasons, but the primary seems to be because a focus on your progress causes you more stress, and as a result, makes you more likely to fail in your endeavors. For instance, a person who checks their weight every day during a new diet or exercise routine will discover how little it changes during this time; the simple introduction of healthier diets and exercise routines does not have immediate, positive results.

Rather, such results require weeks or months of commitment before they show, and this stresses some out because they are results-driven rather than process-driven. Their results are more important to them than their process of eating or exercising better when it should be the opposite. So, when they see that after a few days of exercise or diet their weight has not changed, they become frustrated and stressed, and may quit the routine before results begin to show.

There is the saying that epitomizes this issue: one can hit a rock a hundred times and not get so much as a crack, whereas on the 101st hit, the rock finally cracks. One must keep swinging, keep perservering before they can see even the basics of results. James Clear calls this the plateau of latent potential in his book, _Atomic Habits_.

So this is why the self-improvement gurus say to focus on your process, or system: a series of actions to accomplish some aim or goal. One does not need to worry themselves with how many times they need to hit the rock before it cracks; rather, they focus on their swing, on hitting the rock. If they hit it enough, they believe, the rock will crack at some point.

With a system, you start with a goal, say to become healthier. From there, you can generation actions that will work towards that goal, such as go for a run three times a week, work out at the gym twice a week, or eat less processed foods every day. Then, to focus on your system, you do those actions as necessary. You don't focus on results, nor the goal. The value is not in those things but the system. You know, or should know, that it is through the right system that we will become better.

But to do this is not easy: it requires a lot of hard work and self-discipline. To cultivate discipline is a whole matter of itself, but most self-help gurus say _to start with the why._ _Why am I doing this?_ By now, we should know what we're doing, but not necessarily why we're doing it. We may have vague ideas of a why, but nothing genuine, and this is where these gurus claim we must focus a lot of our energy on defining. It is the "why" that will keep us disciplined which will keep us on our systems.

The "why" is the keystone in our arch, which is our systems and habits: without that keystone, our arch will be unstable and will likely fall.

The gurus say to create a "why" by spending a lot of time in reflection on our "what" and our feelings about that "what." In other words, we think about it a lot. We ask ourselves, _why am I doing this? What is the deep drive that I have about this? Who embodies this "what," who is closest to what you want to become? What values of mine does this possess? Is this consistent with my character?_ Then some answers will surface to the top, and it is through them where lies your desired and defined "why."

Here is my example, in which I defined a why for my becoming a philosopher-writer:

_Why am I doing this?_

To become a philosopher-writer because I love philosophy and I love writing; the two complete my calling in life. I think through these studies, I will accomplish something great. I will do the work of the Muses, and bring into existence the great work I am destined to create.

_What is the deep drive that I have about this?_

I have this _need_ to do _real good_ for people. It is a fundament of my being to do good for others. This need feels like a fibrous knot in my stomach and muscles; a tenderness for life that is unparalleled to any other need in my life. It is a physical need. As I write this, I feel a tenderness in my arms that wasn't there before; and it travels down to my fingers; this tenderness in my stomach too. I don't know how else I can explain or define this feeling but as a physical tenderness.

I know that through my philosophy and writing, I will accomplish this need.

_Who embodies this 'what,' who is closet to who I want to become?_

Alan Watts is my inspiration. I think through my philosophy and writing, I will become a modern-day Alan Watts for my generation, or something of the sorts. I want to do what he did for me: to share the philosophy that inspires healing of the soul through the betterment of one's self.

Another inspiration is Henry David Thoreau.

_What values does this possess? Is this consistent with my character?_

My current values are discipline, excellence, wisdom, and self-reliance. Many philosophers and writers, including Alan Watts and Thoreau, embody these values too. They also embody virtue, so I can presume this is consistent with my character; becoming a philosopher-writer is actualizing my true character.

Now that we have a "why," we need to put it to use; we need to use it such that it acts as the drive behind our "what." This is creating creeds, mantras, or legacy statements that embody the "why," and this is what I have done. For example, these lines appear in my creed: "This is my promise to those who have come before," such as Alan Watts, Thoreau, and all the others who serve as an inspiration to me; "And this is my sacrifice for those who will come after," as in I choose to study philosophy and to write for those who will come later, for those who may discover value in my work, and better themselves as a result of it, doing thier own good work. In this, I am picking up "the mantle of time's creations," or I am stepping to the shoes of Thoreau, Watts, Emerson, and all the other inspirators, to carry on what the world needs to know to be better and do better.
