---
layout: default
date: 2020-02-08 14:50:00 -0700
title: "On financial goals, and a note on desire"
categories: essays
tags: definitions desire money minimalism
---

I keep my financial goals basic: for wealth, I want enough to support me for two years without changing my routines and to have zero debt; for income, $50,000 is fine as I want to be able to live off $30,000 per year. That leaves about \$20,000 left, and 100% of this will go towards debts until those are cleared. Once that happens, I will save 70% of it and donate the rest.

I keep my financial goals basic because I am not attracted to wealth or potential. Rather, I want financial stability. I do not want, as I have now, to be troubled by nagging collectors for unpaid bills and debts. My debts make me a slave to those creditors, and my freedom is vital to my work and my satisfaction with life. So, the point of reaching financial stability is to gain freedom and serenity, which will translate into my work. It would be nice to never again have a creditor calling my phone or sending collection notices in the mail.

I have learned my lesson with debt. If you allow, it will suck you dry. Many believe that debt can be useful if tamed well, and perhaps that's true, but I have no interest in having debt. Debt is a weight I do not want as it distracts me from my life and work. Debt is a threat to my good existence.

As for income, the amount is arbitrary for the most part. I chose $50,000 as the minimum because it is enough to live on in my way while building wealth that can support me for years. The minimal wealth I want is enough to survive on for two years without a stable income — so if I live on $25,000 per year, I want at least \$50,000 saved. Should I lose a steady income, I should have no worries about surviving until I work and move on. More, this amount can tackle any unexpected purchases in emergencies: medical, mechanical, natural, etc. If my car dies and I need a new one, then I will go and buy a used one in cash without much worry and will replenish what I have spent from my fund in the preceding months. If I have a medical emergency, then I will have it solved — I do not want any issues or worries as a result of insufficient funding. More, it would be nice to have some wealth so that I can explore the world freely at times. Enough to travel cheaply yet experience what those places have to offer.

These financial goals are possible because what I desire is minimal. I don't need a large house or expensive luxuries. I am satisfied with the minimal necessities: a cheap, small house, and decent yet cheap belongings. Good clothing. No baubles. Everything must have a practical use. I can eat cheaply, and my luxuries are cheap as well. Spotify, books, video games. I can gain enough entertainment and pleasure from these in addition to the pleasure of my work and hobbies. Some adventures are cheap too: movies, museums, walks, etc. The things I need are simple and affordable, and the things that are enough are not much more than what is essential. In this, I am happy.

Remember, though, that true wealth is not having money or nice things, but in having few desires. This is the wisdom of Epictetus, and we'd be wise to apply it. We often want things we cannot have or cannot get easily, and this makes our lives miserable. The Buddhists teach us that desire is the source of suffering, and this is because, in our desires, we are clinging to things we cannot control. We are trying to hold fix an impermanent thing, and this impossible action makes our lives worse.

As such, we should be desireless. Know that this is not the absence of desire, but rather to have strictly formulated ones. That is, we desire to desire what we already have or can easily obtain. Then, our second desire is to have desires that conform to our first desire. In being desireless, we limit our frustrations and the harm to our tranquility our desire can cause us.

So, what are your financial goals? What is essential for your life, and what is enough? Learn to be satisfied with the simple and few. In defining these things, ask yourself: do I have this already or is it easily obtainable? Can I live without it? Is the disturbance to my tranquility this desire will cause me worth its acquisition? Often, it is not. Remember that for each of these actions, there exist processes that allow you to appropriately address them. For instance, in deciding whether or not a thing is worth getting, take a break from this question, and note how your life is without it. Spend five or ten minutes, or longer, in thought about how life is now and how life would be with that thing. You will find an answer to the original question in doing this, and you would be wise to apply such appropriate exercises to other related issues.
