---
layout: default
date: 2020-02-07 16:00:00 -0700
title: "On quitting YouTube"
categories: essays
tags: addictions simplicity distractions life
---

Here’s a confession: I love YouTube. It’s a great site with thousands of hours worth of content that I would enjoy watching. Anything I can imagine, and there are videos about it. There’s entertainment in the form of gaming videos and commentaries. There’s edutainment in the form of video essays on philosophy and other interesting topics. There is a lot of value there too — a lot of great videos from knowledgeable people who have something valuable to say.

YouTube is so good that it’s easy for me to spend hours on it. Sure, I might be learning something valuable at that time, but is that thing as valuable as the work I’ve could have done? No. My work is why I live. I am not living to learn forever, even if what I am learning will improve me or my life, or even allow me to improve the lives of others. I think the best of what I learn from YouTube will be learned from my work and the progression of my life.

Much of what I “learn” from YouTube isn’t learned in the definition that something learned is something applied for betterment. I have watched a half dozen videos today about methods for reaching my best potential, overcoming procrastination and doing my work, and so on. (I find it ironic that I can’t remember all of the topics of videos I watched not an hour ago.) How much of the valuable information in those videos have I applied in my life? Little, if any. And how often have I watched such videos and not made any effort in applying its information to my life? Every day, for years.

Often, the videos that I do watch on YouTube are purely entertainment. They contain no educational value at all. I would speculate that fifty percent of the content I watch is entertainment; a good distraction from doing my work. Such videos include parodies of _How It’s Made_ documentaries or LEGO set reviews or vlogs of someone’s life. It may be that I am generally invested in those creators. I like who they are, and I enjoy what they create. That’s fine, but it doesn’t makeup that watching their content is distracting me from the work that I could and should be doing.

Even the edutainment that I consume is often useless. Sure, I might learn something amazing about science from the Royal Institution, but that amazing thing doesn’t help me do my work or live my life. It’s the knowledge that’s not needed; it doesn’t get used or applied in my life. It’s useless. While it’s great to learn for the sake of learning, there’s a point at which this is harmful. When learning becomes excessive, it becomes a distraction from work and practice. Someone can spend a lifetime learning but produce nothing of value. Why? Because knowledge is useless unless it is applied to life when it becomes wisdom. From wisdom comes work, and work is value. As such, learning in itself, or the gaining of knowledge is useless unless there is an aim to apply that knowledge.

When I watch a lecture from the Royal Institution’s YouTube channel, do I have the intention of using the knowledge that I learn from it? No, I do not. Then, what is the point of watching the lecture? For entertainment in the name of education.

And here's a fact: A lot of the educational, valuable content I watch on YouTube is snippets from podcasts that are available on other sites and apps, or reviews of books which I can buy and read myself. Therefore, it is not necessary to use YouTube to gain access to that content and its information.

Where am I going with this? To the truth that a very small percent of the videos I watch on YouTube are necessarily valuable, and even so, I often do not apply their valuable information to my life. By "necessarily valuable," I mean the videos contain information that could better my life, my work, and enable me to do more good for my fellow kind. It would be of benefit if I watched such videos and applied what they had to share with my life and work. But because I often do not apply their information to my life and work, the video's value to me is insufficient to warrant the cost of my time. My watching YouTube is wasting my time that could be better spent on important work. This assumes that my time is the cost of my work, which is in addition to other costs.

What am I saying? That YouTube, for me, is a waste of time and a distraction from my work, more often than not. So, why do I continue to use it? Because it’s addicting. It’s sugar for my brain, and it feels damn good to indulge YouTube’s content. It doesn’t help, of course, that the site is designed to be addicting. It’s algorithms present the best videos that you’re most likely wanting to watch, and each time you watch, it’s a dopamine hit. It’s the same principle behind the addictions to Facebook, Twitter, and other social media. YouTube is a social media, too, after all.

For the sake of me and my work, I must quit YouTube with a swift cut. The full measure — I leave nothing to chance. I know that if I watch just one video on that site, I will be hooked a little deeper. The only option is to unhook me for good. After all, the content I do want can be found in other places. There is no reason to continue YouTube. So, I quit. I recorded a few of the best channels related to my interests in case I need their content for my work, and then I unsubscribed from every channel. I closed out of YouTube and deleted links to it. I don’t want to see that red play button anywhere ever again. It’s a weird feeling, but a good one, to have quit something so intrinsic to my life. I know I will be better for this decision.
