---
layout: default
date: 2020-01-21 16:00:00 -0700
title: "Some lessons on desire"
categories: essays
tags: desire desirelessness life philosophy
---

I had a problem: I did not know what I wanted, as such I chased what felt right. This chase led me into directions that felt good as if I was going in the right direction with my life, but I always found myself changing directions. One got boring, and I moved into a new one that was more interesting and exciting. This is called the thoughtless pursuit of pleasure.

Thoughtless pursuing pleasure leads to hell because once one has done all of the things that they deem pleasurable, the only thing that’s left that they can get a kick out of is pain. The suffering of others or themselves. This, I think, is why the Romans had such grand spectacles as feeding slaves to lions — nothing else got their rocks off once they enjoyed (almost) everything life had to offer them.

My pursuit transitioned to pain in 2017, which I was feeling lost in college: one, I didn’t know what I wanted to study, and had switched around so much I was behind two years with bad grades; two, I transferred schools and moved into an expensive apartment I could not afford and I had no job, so I paid with credit cards, which maxed out and resulted in my eviction and my high debt; three, my student aid fell through, and I was left with a large bill for my new university which I could not pay and resulted in more debt and my withdraw from school; four, I declined a career position, which offered generous benefits and salary without having finished college, in the Colorado mining industry for a professional development program which may have employed me in a career if I did not quit that too.

When I gave up the mining offer, I realized how foolish I was. I knew I had a problem, because no one with some smarts, I think, would turn down a job that would set them up for decades, even if they didn’t stay in that industry. I identified my not knowing what I wanted as the issue and set to fixing it. That’s when I discovered Alan Watts’s lectures on desire.

In one of his lectures, Watts suggested that students entering college should write a 20-page essay on what they desire, rather than take entrance exams. I thought that was a good idea, and set to write that essay, thinking that it will illuminate what I desired enough that I can finally become focused. So, I started with lists of desires that I thought corresponded to aspects of my life (mind, social, et cetera), and then for each desire, I define what exactly it was, why I desired it, what it cost to get, and what consequences were there for getting it, and then I reasoned whether or not it was worth it. If it was, I “embraced my desire,” and if it wasn’t, I was to “reject my desire.”

So, I attempted this exercise for a few weeks and discovered it was hard to do it. One, I could not write about any desire if I did not already believe it was true. Two, my reasons, costs, and consequences for my desires were all superficial at best if I could even name them at all. Three, even after defining a desire to some degree, the nagging question remained: _is this really what you want?_ And, in answering it I said, “No, I don’t think this is what I want.”

After all of that rigor, I still did not know what I wanted, but I did fall into the guru’s trap. I had realized for myself one of two things Watts wanted to part to his audience: that knowing desire is a paradoxical endeavor, like looking at the back of your head with just your eyes — you can’t do it, and there’s no reason why you would in the first place.

So, why don’t I know what I _really_ want? “Two reasons,” Watts said. “One, you already have it.” That makes sense and was something I never considered before. And it’s true: some of the desires I had attempted to define for my exercise were things I already had in some way. “Two, you don’t know yourself… because you never can.” What? Why can’t I know myself — didn’t the Greeks emphasize knowing thyself?

“The godhead,” Watts continued, “is never the object of its knowledge just as fire doesn’t burn itself, a knife doesn’t cut itself, a light doesn’t illuminate itself. It is always an endless mystery to itself.” Just as water can’t drown itself, right? But what does Watts mean by this? I struggled to reason that.

This is what I figured out given my weak knowledge in Buddhist philosophy: the self Watts refers to, I think, is the _atman_, which is the eternal, true self of an individual. It is like one’s soul, and its nature is impermanence. It is never defined as a singular thing, and in trying to define one’s desires, they are, I think, trying to define a piece of their _atman_. But they can’t because of its nature, it is always changing. So, every desire one acknowledges they have is then a fleeting glimpse of their _atman_; so, if I desired at one point to be a mathematician, that’s what my true soul thought of itself at one moment in the past. But that might not be true either, since before the _atman_ is the _anatman_, or the non-self, the ego. Perhaps a desire is then the imprint of the _atman_ on the _anatman_, and so what one is seeing is their ego. And by the _anatman_’s nature, it is permanent, which I think explains why we think desires as an unchanging element of one’s person.

My desire to be a mathematician will always be my desire to be a mathematician, even if I alter it slightly to be an applied mathematician. An applied mathematician is still a mathematician. And if I change desires altogether to become a rhetorician, then I now have a new desire that is unrelated to my previous desire. Being a rhetorician is not the same as being a mathematician. Every desire that is acknowledged and defined becomes permanent even if it is slightly changed, and this is because desire is a result of the ego, the _anatman._

This leads to the second lesson Watts had for his audience: not knowing what you want is the definition of desirelessness. When one does not know what they want or know who they are, which is the same thing but a said in another way, and they don’t seek to know, then they have reached the state of desirelessness. But what does that mean? First, it does not mean that they have no desire. See, desire is an integral part of the human being — try not to desire, and is that not desiring in itself? Try to desire less, and that is a desire in itself as well. Desire is a fundament of being. So, you cannot live without desire, but rather you can choose to not cling to what you might acknowledge as a desire. That’s the second part of desirelessness.

Desire is clinging to one’s Self: it is an attempt at controlling their _atman_, an attempt at controlling impermanence such that it remains permanent. Why? Because we’re afraid of change. We would prefer for things to stay the same because that’s comfortable and easy compared to uncertainty and suffering, and this preferring is desire. Watts said that desire is an act of self-defense because we do not trust ourselves, others, god, or Fate, and so we must protect ourselves because we fear that outside forces will influence our change.

Now, in Buddhism, desire is the source of suffering. The Sanskrit word for desire is “Trishna,” meaning thirst, cling, desire, hang up. Hanging up is exactly what we do when we’re desiring: we hang up on something rather than let it go. In this idea, I think of a boy in a stream who catches a stick. It’s a mighty impressive stick, and the boy’s friends wish to see it as well. But the boy is afraid that they might steal the stick (which is an act of change, into the state of sticklessness), so he defends his having of it. The boy protects himself from his friends so that they cannot see or experience that stick, and he cannot lose it. He’s _clinging_ to that stick. Now, the other boys go off and find other cool things floating in the stream, but our boy does not. He sees what floats by, another stick, some leaves, a bag, et cetera. Interesting things that the boy might want to experience, but he cannot because his hands are full clinging to the stick. But look! A beautiful toy is floating by, and the boy wants to grab it up. But his stick… he cannot grab the toy if he does not let go of his stick. What should he do?

He should let go of his stick, and experience the toy, and then let go of it too. If he does, then he will experience more of what the stream (or Life) has to offer. Desiring to certain things prevents us from doing that whereas desirelessness allows that. Being desirelessness releases the energy which is spent on clinging to what we have, and that energy is then allowed to become what is called the Divine Principle. The Principle is the more you let go, the more you give away, the more it comes back. So, what the boy should be learning is to let go of what he desires, his stick and the toy, and learn to appreciate what floats by without having to grab it up. That’s desirelessness and the allowance of the Divine Principle.

I’m learning to be desirelessness, and in doing so, I am finding some peace. Since I do not cling to desires as I have before, I do not feel traumatized or isolated by desires that come counterpart to what I enjoy now. For instance, a bit ago I thought I should become an English professor instead of a philosopher. Instead of considering that desire as I would have before, I let it go by reminding myself that I am enjoying philosophy and that I cannot know who I am supposed to be before I become that person. In other words, I will be who I am to be. If that is a philosopher or an English professor, or someone else, then so shall I be. I will naturally find that right direction by not giving in and clinging to every desire that comes my way. I stay my course in what Life has offered to me, which is philosophy.

Philosophy to me is like a toy that gets stuck on the bank of the boy’s stream. It’s there for a while, and there is no harm in appreciating it while it’s there. But should I return to it someday and find that the toy is gone, then I will turn to appreciate whatever else the stream offers to me. I will not cling to philosophy nor will I mourn its loss as I know that the more I give back, the more that will come my way.
