---
layout: default
date: 2020-02-10 16:00:00 -0700
title: "On real beauty"
categories: essays
tags: character traits being philosophy
---

I have in my time met "beautiful" people: women and men who won the genetic lottery, having the right proportions and such. These characteristics made me desire those women and admire those men. They were a source of desire, of lust, and of who I could have been if I was luckier. And in their presence, I wondered how I could have been so blessed to be there. I also explored their character, believing then that beauty was some combination of physical and unphysical characteristics.

In those times, that is how I assessed someone: how did they look and how was their character? This was wrong, however, as it gave too much credit to circumstance rather than ability. Are we just in assessing one's character on part of their physical attributes? No, because we cannot judge someone by their physical characteristics: as Martin Luther King Jr. said, judge someone by the content of their character, not by the color of their skin, or any of physical quality for that matter. Why? Because physical qualities do not make the person, but their character does. I have met people with beautiful physical features, but their character was quite ugly.

"Then what makes a beautiful human being?" asked Epictetus many centuries ago. "Isn't it the presence of human excellence? Young friend, if you wish to be beautiful, then work diligently at human excellence. And what is that? Observe those who whom you praise without prejudice. The just or the unjust? The just. The even-tempered or the undisciplined? The even-tempered. The self-controlled or the uncontrolled? The self-controlled. In making yourself that kind of person, you will become beautiful — but to the extent you ignore these qualities, you'll be ugly, even if you use every trick in the book to appear beautiful." Real beauty is not defined by one's body, but by the condition of their soul, by their character. We can ask of them, Do they have virtue and do they work to the best of their ability? and discover whether or not they're beautiful.

Why is beauty defined by character? Because it is their character that makes the person valuable to others. I think most can tolerate being around a person with nice physical features, but few would want to be near someone with a nasty attitude. Rather, we enjoy the company of those who have good character; those who may express qualities we want to adopt, such as being tolerant of others or being productive, or those who are cheerful or inspirational. Why is it that we enjoy such a company? Because they are committed to their social duties.

It was Marcus Aurelius who said that a person's second purpose of their life is to be social — to do good for their fellow kin, to do good for the positive progression of humanity. If we do this duty, we will gain a good life, and it is easier for us to accomplish this duty if the people we are doing it to have a good character. Then, we want to be good to them because they are good for us. As a collective community, being good to each other is vital for its health as a whole and its members.

Aurelius said also, "what harms bee also harms the hive." A person with an ugly character is a detriment to humanity because they prevent others from doing their social duty. Their actions and opinions harm others, physically or mentally, and this harm prevents those victims from doing their duty, from being good themselves.

How often do we respond with hate when someone lashes out at us? Often, I think, and it is this transaction that we must be against. Why? Because it detracts from our character: to respond with hate requires an ugly character, which is easily gained from a person who just insulted us. But to protect our good character, we should respond with true kindness, from the heart. Remember that Aurelius [had to remind himself every morning of the ugly people he would meet throughout the day and why they were ugly,](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/497005-when-you-wake-up-in-the-morning-tell-yourself-the 'Marcus Aurelius: "When you wake up ... "') and in doing so, protected his character which allowed him to accomplish his duties as an emperor and a human.

So, what makes a good character? As Epictetus said, having human excellence. What is that? I think it is one part being virtuous, and the other working in one's duties to the best of their ability. Remember that to be virtuous, you must uphold the four cardinal virtues: justice, wisdom, courage, and temperance. By doing this do we ensure that our moral intuition remains healthy, which then enables us to find meaning for our lives which makes our suffering bearable.

If one has a bad character, then their moral intuition is diseased, and their lives likely have little meaning in them, which means that they suffer terribly in their life. So, an ugly soul is the source of excess suffering. Conversely, someone with real beauty in their soul likely finds a lot of meaning in the world, and suffer little in their lives. This is important because it allows them to work to the best of their ability in their duties.

What is it to work to the best of one's ability, and why does it matter? First, it is to gain clarity in one's life such that they know who they are, who they want to be, and how they will serve others, how they will do work for a higher purpose. Someone with clarity knows to cut from their lives the excess which would distract them from their work. They are focused, self-disciplined, and whole-hearted. Second, working to the best of one's ability allows them to do the most good in their lives and duties. This in effect allows them to make valuable contributions to the progression of humanity — their best work is valuable to a higher purpose, and as such, their lives have meaning. By working to the best of their ability, they decrease the amount of suffering they have. They live good lives!

Be wise in knowing this: it is never how one looks that matters, this is the result of negative influences from society. These influences are diseases of humanity, and you should be avoidant of them. Vaccinate yourself against these diseases by being virtuous and working to the best of one's ability. Be beautiful in your character, as that is what matters to everything that is life.
